---
# 这是文章的标题
title: Historical Ciphers and their cryptanalysis
# 你可以自定义封面图片
cover: /assets/images/cover1.jpg
# 这是页面的图标
icon: paper-plane
# 这是侧边栏的顺序
order: 1
# 设置作者
author: Mr.Liu
# 设置写作时间
date: 2024-11-05
# 一个页面可以有多个分类
category:
  - 密码学
# 一个页面可以有多个标签
tag:
  - 笔记
# 此页面会在文章列表置顶
sticky: false
# 此页面会出现在星标文章中
star: false
# 你可以自定义页脚
footer: 箱根山岳险天下
# 你可以自定义版权信息
copyright: 无版权
---

# Historical Ciphers and their cryptanalysis

## Caesar's cipher

**Encryption:**

Shift the letters of the alphabet 3 places forward

> There is no key because the encryption method is fixed.

## The shift cipher

> The shift cipher can be viewed as a keyed variant of Caesar's cipher.

**Encryption:**

The key k is a number between 0 and 25. To encrypt, letters are shifted by k places forward.

**Attack:**

Try every possible key. This is called a brute-force or exhausitive-search attack.

### *sufficient key-space principle*

*Any secure encryption scheme must have a key space that is sufficiently large to make an exhaustive-search attack infeasible.*

## The mon-alphabetic substitution cipher

**Encryption:**

The key defines a map on the alphabet, and the map is allowed to be arbitrary subject only to the constraint that it be one-to-one.

**Example:**

The key defines the following permutation:

| a | b | c | d | e | f | g | h | i | j | k | l | m | n | o | p | q | r | s | t | u | v | w | x | y | z |
| -- | -- | -- | :--: | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- |
| X | E | U | A | D | N | B | K | V | M | R | O | C | Q | F | S | Y | H | W | G | L | Z | I | J | P | T |

Message `tellhimaboutme` is encrypted to `GDOOKVCXEFLGCD`

**Attack:**

Tabulate the frequency distribution of characters in the cipher text. The frequencies are then compared to compared to the known letter frequencies of normal English text.

## An improved attack on the shift cipher

> It is difficult for a compute to check whether a given plaintext "make sense". But the following attack does not suffer from that.

Let $p_i$ denotes the frequency of the $i$th letter in normal English text.

$$
\sum ^{25} _{i=0} p^2_i \approx 0.065
$$

Now say we are given some ciphertext and let $q_i$ denotes the frequency of $i$th letter of the alphabet in this ciphertext.

$$
I_j \overset{\underset{\mathrm{def}}{}}{=} \sum ^{25}_{i=0} p_i \cdot q_{i+j}
$$

If we compute for each value of $j \in \{ 0, \ldots, 25 \}$, the we expect to find  that $I_k \approx 0.065$, whereas $I_j$ for $j \neq k$ will be different from 0.065.

## The Vigen$\grave{e}$re (poly-alphabetic shift) cipher

**Encryption:**

The key is viewed as a string of letters; encryption is done by shifting each plaintext character by the amount indicated by the next character of the key, wrapping around in the key when necessary.

**Example:**

| Plaintext: | tellhimaboutme |
| :-- | :--|
| Key (repeated): | cafecafecafeca |
| Ciphertext | VEQPJIREDOZXOE |

**Attack:**

If the length of the key if known:

Say the length of the key is $t$, then an observed cipher $c = c_1c_2\cdots$ can be divided into $t$ parts where each part can be viewed as having been encrypted using the shift cipher.

How to determine the key length from an observed ciphertext ?

The following approach is called the *index of coincidence method*.

For $\tau = 1,2,\ldots,T$, look at the sequence of ciphertext characters $c_1, c_{1+\tau}, c_{1+2\tau}, \cdots$ and tabulate $q_0, \cdots, q_{25}$ for this sequence. Then compute

$$
S_{\tau} \overset{\underset{\mathrm{def}}{}}{=} \sum ^{25}_{i=0} q_i^2
$$ 

When $\tau = t$ we expect $S_{\tau} \approx 0.065$

On the other hand, if $\tau$ is not a multiple of $t$ we expect that all characters will occur with roughly equal probability in the sequence $c_1, c_{1+\tau}, c_{1+2\tau}, \cdots$ , and so we expect $q_i \approx 1 / 26$ for all $i$. In this case we will obtain

$$
S_{\tau} \approx \sum^{25}_{i=0} (\frac{1}{26})^2 \approx 0.038
$$

